Document special tables exposed by Iceberg (#10514)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/iceberg.rst

        partitioning = ARRAY['c1', 'c2'],
        location = '/var/my_tables/test_table')

.. _iceberg-special-tables:

Special tables

> --------------

Author: I tend to agree with you @kbendick .
I got inspired from [hive](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/blob/master/docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/hive.rst#special-tables) connector where these tables are called like this. 
I will change the naming here.

> --------------

Author: @mosabua  do you know why the metadata tables are called _special tables_ in the hive connector?

The Iceberg connector maintains several hidden tables that provide metadata
for a specific table. You can query each metadata table by appending the
metadata table name to the table name::

   SELECT * FROM "test_table$data"

``$data`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``$data`` table is an alias for the Iceberg table.

The statement::

    SELECT * FROM "test_table$data"

is equivalent to::

    SELECT * FROM test_table

``$properties`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``$properties`` table provides general metadata information about the table.

Reviewer: Nit: Possibly the usage of `provides general metadata information about the table` is redundant without further clarifying that the metadata is user supplied (or generated) tags for the tables in addition to configured table properties (some of which are specific to iceberg).

Maybe `The $properties table provides access to general information about iceberg table configuration and any additional metadata key/value pairs that users or engines mighthave tagged the table with. `?

Alternatively, it might be ok to simply reference that this is similar to hive's `TBLPROPERTIES`?

For reference I found the following in [Hive's documentation](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/Hive/LanguageManual+DDL#LanguageManualDDL-CreateTable):
```
The TBLPROPERTIES clause allows you to tag the table definition with your own
metadata key/value pairs. Some predefined table properties also exist,
such as last_modified_user and last_modified_time which are automatically
added and managed by Hive.
```

Iceberg doesn't supply `last_modified_time` as a tblproperty itself, but we also don't specifically try to stop HMS from adding these.

Reviewer: I just noticed there is another PR specifically related to `$properties`, so I'll likely move this comment there if appropriate =)

Author: > I just noticed there is another PR specifically related to $properties

[#10480](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/10480) is already merged.
I'm updating correspondingly the docs here.

You can retrieve the changelog of the Iceberg table ``test_table``

> by using the query::

Reviewer: Question: This is likely outside the scope of this PR, but since this is a changelog of the table properties, are there any additional plans to provide information on current info or when something was added?

I know Iceberg doesn't natively provide this functionality, so it might be difficult but wondering how the changelog is provided.

Author: Could you please provide an example so that I understand what you mean?
Here is the implementation of the functionality behind the `$properties` table
https://github.com/trinodb/trino/blob/master/plugin/trino-iceberg/src/main/java/io/trino/plugin/iceberg/PropertiesTable.java

Author: `changelog` term was falsely placed.  sorry for the confusion.

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: Snapshots columns
  :widths: 20, 30, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``commited_at``
    - ``timestamp(3) with time zone``
    - The time when the snapshot became active
  * - ``snapshot_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier for the snapshot
  * - ``parent_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier for the parent snapshot
  * - ``operation``
    - ``varchar``
    - The type of operation performed on the Iceberg table.
      Supported operation types in Iceberg are

      * ``append`` when new data is appended,
      * ``replace`` when files are removed and replaced without changing the data in the table,
      * ``overwrite`` when new data is added to overwrite existing data,

>       * ``delete`` when data is deleted from the table  and no new data is added

Reviewer: Nit: As this looks like an unordered sublist, are the commas at the end of each statement standard?

     hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/test_table/metadata/faa19903-1455-4bb8-855a-61a1bbafbaa7-m0.avro |  6277           |   0                  | 7860805980949777961   |  1                       |   0                         |  0                          |{{contains_null=false, lower_bound=1, upper_bound=1},{contains_null=false, lower_bound=2021-01-12, upper_bound=2021-01-12}}

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: Manifests columns
  :widths: 30, 30, 40
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``path``
    - ``varchar``
    - The manifest file location
  * - ``length``
    - ``bigint``
    - The manifest file length
  * - ``partition_spec_id``
    - ``integer``
    - The identifier for the partition
  * - ``added_snapshot_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier of the snapshot during which this manifest entry has been added
  * - ``added_data_files_count``
    - ``integer``
    - The number of data files added during the snapshot
  * - ``deleted_data_files_count``
    - ``integer``
    - The number of data files deleted during the snapshot
  * - ``partitions``

>     - ``array(row(contains_null boolean, lower_bound varchar, upper_bound varchar))``

Reviewer: Question: is `contains_nan` not included from within Trino?

Author: https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/10702

    ----------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------------------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+----------------+---------------
     0        | hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/test_table/data/c1=3/c2=2021-01-14/af9872b2-40f3-428f-9c87-186d2750d84e.parquet |  1              |  PARQUET      |  442                 | {1=40, 2=40, 3=44}   |  {1=1, 2=1, 3=1}  |  {1=0, 2=0, 3=0}   | <null>            |  {1=3, 2=2021-01-14, 3=1.3} |  {1=3, 2=2021-01-14, 3=1.3} |  <null>        | <null>         |   <null>

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: Files columns
  :widths: 20, 30, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``content``
    - ``integer``

>     - Type of content stored in the file.

Reviewer: Might consider referring to this as an enum.

Author: Can you suggest me an appropriate way to bring up the `enum` aspect in the description?

      The supported types of content supported in Iceberg are

      * ``DATA(0)``
      * ``POSITION_DELETES(1)``
      * ``EQUALITY_DELETES(2)``
  * - ``file_path``
    - ``varchar``
    - The data file location
  * - ``file_format``
    - ``varchar``
    - The format of the data file
  * - ``record_count``
    - ``bigint``
    - The number of entries contained in the data file
  * - ``file_size_in_bytes``
    - ``bigint``
    - The data file size
  * - ``column_sizes``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``

>     - The size for each column in the columnar file

Reviewer: Nit: Would it be worth mentioning for these that the integer keys are the field IDs used by Iceberg?

I don't have a good way at the moment to express that (especially without looking at the rest of the existing docs). This could be a follow up item, if anything.

Author: Good point.

I have adapted this to:

>  Mapping between the Iceberg column ID and its corresponding size within the columnar file

  * - ``value_counts``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``
    - The count of entries per column in columnar file
  * - ``null_value_counts``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``
    - The number of ``NULL`` values per column in the columnar file
  * - ``nan_value_counts``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``
    - The number of non numerical values per column in the columnar file
  * - ``lower_bounds``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``
    - The lower bounds per column in the columnar file
  * - ``upper_bounds``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``
    - The upper bounds per column in the columnar file
  * - ``key_metadata``
    - ``varbinary``

>     - Metadata about how this file is encrypted, if applicable

Reviewer: So this is an odd one, as it's not currently used in open source (though it's coming and a high priority on the roadmap).

The javadoc for this interface (which is a light wrapper around a ByteBuffer) refer to this as `metadata about an encrypted data file's encryption key.` More specifically, it likely refers to the location of the encryption key but that's probably being iterated on to be more efficient so I wouldn't state that for now.

Maybe `Metadata about the encryption key used to encrypt this file, if applicable`?

I should mention that the [avro doc comment for this just simply says `Encryption key metadata blob`](**https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/461cd7b1e90c589f411d739b24b5c34848e3cdd5/api/src/main/java/org/apache/iceberg/DataFile.java#L59**).

        partitioning = ARRAY['c1', 'c2'],
        location = '/var/my_tables/test_table')

.. _iceberg-metadata-tables:

Metadata tables
---------------

The Iceberg connector maintains several hidden tables that provide metadata
for a specific table. You can query each metadata table by appending the
metadata table name to the table name::

   SELECT * FROM "test_table$data"

``$data`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``$data`` table is an alias for the Iceberg table.

The statement::

    SELECT * FROM "test_table$data"

is equivalent to::

    SELECT * FROM test_table

``$properties`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``$properties`` table provides access to general information about iceberg
table configuration and any additional metadata key/value pairs that the table
was tagged with.

> You can retrieve the changelog of the Iceberg table ``test_table``

Reviewer 2: In what way is it a `changelog`. It is current state of properties. Right?

Author: This is a mistake. Sorry.

by using the query::

    SELECT * FROM "test_table$properties"

.. code-block:: text

     key                   | value    |
    -----------------------+----------+
    write.format.default   | PARQUET  |
    format-version         | 2        |

``$history`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``$history`` table provides a log of the metadata changes performed on
the Iceberg table.

You can retrieve the changelog of the Iceberg table ``test_table``
by using the query::

    SELECT * FROM "test_table$history"

.. code-block:: text

>      made_current_ad    | snapshot_id          | parent_id            | is_current_ancestor

Reviewer 2: typo: `ad`

    --------------------+----------------------+----------------------+--------------------

>     2022-01-10 08:11:20 | 8667764846443717831  |  <null>              |  true

Reviewer 2: Example output suggests it is not timestamtp **with time zone**. Maybe it makes sense for brevity IDK.

Author: Copy-pasted the output from IntelliJ sql browser which doesn't show by default the timezone. I modified it now.

    2022-01-10 08:11:34 | 7860805980949777961  | 8667764846443717831  |  true

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: History columns
  :widths: 30, 30, 40
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``made_current_at``
    - ``timestamp(3) with time zone``
    - The time when the snapshot became active
  * - ``snapshot_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier for the snapshot
  * - ``parent_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier for the parent snapshot
  * - ``is_current_ancestor``
    - ``boolean``
    - Whether or not this snapshot is an ancestor of the current snapshot

``$snapshots`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``$snapshots`` table provides a detailed view of snapshots of the
Iceberg table. A snapshot consist of one or more file manifests, and the complete table contents
is represented by the union of all the data files in those manifests.

You can retrieve the information about the snapshots of the Iceberg table
``test_table`` by using the following query::

    SELECT * FROM "test_table$snapshots"

.. code-block:: text

>      commited_at        | snapshot_id          | parent_id            | operation          |  manifest_list                                                                                                                           |   summary

Reviewer 2: typo: commited (should be committed). Here and in other places.

    2022-01-10 08:11:20 | 8667764846443717831  |  <null>              |  append            |   hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/test_table/metadata/snap-8667764846443717831-1-100cf97e-6d56-446e-8961-afdaded63bc4.avro | {changed-partition-count=0, total-equality-deletes=0, total-position-deletes=0, total-delete-files=0, total-files-size=0, total-records=0, total-data-files=0}
    2022-01-10 08:11:34 | 7860805980949777961  | 8667764846443717831  |  append            |   hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/test_table/metadata/snap-7860805980949777961-1-faa19903-1455-4bb8-855a-61a1bbafbaa7.avro | {changed-partition-count=1, added-data-files=1, total-equality-deletes=0, added-records=1, total-position-deletes=0, added-files-size=442, total-delete-files=0, total-files-size=442, total-records=1, total-data-files=1}

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: Snapshots columns
  :widths: 20, 30, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``commited_at``
    - ``timestamp(3) with time zone``
    - The time when the snapshot became active
  * - ``snapshot_id``
    - ``bigint``

>     - The identifier for the snapshot

Reviewer 2: `identifier for` or `identifier of`?

Author: `identifier of`

  * - ``parent_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier for the parent snapshot
  * - ``operation``
    - ``varchar``
    - The type of operation performed on the Iceberg table.

>       Supported operation types in Iceberg are

Reviewer 2: nit: Add `:` at the end

     hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/test_table/metadata/faa19903-1455-4bb8-855a-61a1bbafbaa7-m0.avro |  6277           |   0                  | 7860805980949777961   |  1                       |   0                         |  0                          |{{contains_null=false, lower_bound=1, upper_bound=1},{contains_null=false, lower_bound=2021-01-12, upper_bound=2021-01-12}}

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: Manifests columns
  :widths: 30, 30, 40
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``path``
    - ``varchar``
    - The manifest file location
  * - ``length``
    - ``bigint``
    - The manifest file length
  * - ``partition_spec_id``
    - ``integer``
    - The identifier for the partition
  * - ``added_snapshot_id``
    - ``bigint``

>     - The identifier of the snapshot during which this manifest entry has been added

Reviewer 2: Let's at least be consistent with for/of :)

  * - ``added_data_files_count``
    - ``integer``

>     - The number of data files added during the snapshot

Reviewer 2: Maybe: The number of data files added using manifest file

Author: Thanks for pointing this out.
I took now `org.apache.iceberg.ManifestFile`  javadoc as reference.

  * - ``deleted_data_files_count``
    - ``integer``

>     - The number of data files deleted during the snapshot

Reviewer 2: as above

    - Partition range metadata

``$partitions`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``$partitions`` table provides a detailed overview of the partitions
of the  Iceberg table.

You can retrieve the information about the partitions of the Iceberg table
``test_table`` by using the query::

    SELECT * FROM "test_table$partitions"

.. code-block:: text

     partition             | record_count  | file_count    | total_size    |  data
    -----------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+--------------------------------------
    {c1=1, c2=2021-01-12}  |  2            | 2             |  884          | {c3={min=1.0, max=2.0, null_count=0}}
    {c1=1, c2=2021-01-13}  |  1            | 1             |  442          | {c3={min=1.0, max=1.0, null_count=0}}

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: Partitions columns
  :widths: 20, 30, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``partition``
    - ``row(...)``
    - A row which contains the mapping of the partition column name(s) to the partition column value(s)
  * - ``record_count``
    - ``bigint``

>     - The number of records under the partition

Reviewer 2: nit: under -> in

  * - ``file_count``
    - ``bigint``
    - The number of files mapped under the partition
  * - ``total_size``
    - ``bigint``
    - The size of all the files under the partition
  * - ``data``
    - ``row(... row (min ..., max ... , null_count bigint))``
    - Partition range metadata

``$files`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``$files`` table provides a detailed overview of the data files corresponding to the  Iceberg table.

Reviewer 2: All files or files active in current snapshot. If the latter please be more specific in desc.

     0        | hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/test_table/data/c1=3/c2=2021-01-14/af9872b2-40f3-428f-9c87-186d2750d84e.parquet |  1              |  PARQUET      |  442                 | {1=40, 2=40, 3=44}   |  {1=1, 2=1, 3=1}  |  {1=0, 2=0, 3=0}   | <null>            |  {1=3, 2=2021-01-14, 3=1.3} |  {1=3, 2=2021-01-14, 3=1.3} |  <null>        | <null>         |   <null>

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: Files columns
  :widths: 20, 30, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``content``
    - ``integer``
    - Type of content stored in the file.
      The supported types of content supported in Iceberg are

      * ``DATA(0)``
      * ``POSITION_DELETES(1)``
      * ``EQUALITY_DELETES(2)``
  * - ``file_path``
    - ``varchar``
    - The data file location
  * - ``file_format``
    - ``varchar``
    - The format of the data file
  * - ``record_count``
    - ``bigint``
    - The number of entries contained in the data file
  * - ``file_size_in_bytes``
    - ``bigint``
    - The data file size
  * - ``column_sizes``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``

>     - Mapping between the Iceberg column ID and its corresponding size within the columnar file

Reviewer 2: `How much data given column (identified by ID) uses in data file`?

Reviewer 2: If not still change `within the columnar file` to `in the data file`

> .. _iceberg-materialized-views:

Reviewer 3: this anchor needs to stay with the materialized views section

Special tables
--------------

> The Iceberg connector makes available several hidden tables that can provide insights regarding

Reviewer 3: The Iceberg connector maintains several hidden tables that provide metadata for a specific table. You can query each metadata table by appending the metadata table name to the table name::

   SELECT * FROM "test_table$data"

the metadata of an Iceberg table.

``$data`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``$data`` hidden table is an alias for the Iceberg table.

The statements::

    SELECT * FROM "test_table$data"

> is logically equivalent to::

Reviewer 3: remove "logically"

    SELECT * FROM test_table

``$history`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``$history`` table provides a log of the changes performed on the Iceberg table.

Reviewer 2: `of metadata changes`?

Use the following query::

    SELECT * FROM "test_table$history"

> to retrieve the changelog of the Iceberg table ``test_table``.

Reviewer 3: dont break up sentence with code block .. have full sentence above

.. code-block:: text

     made_current_ad    | snapshot_id          | parent_id            | is_current_ancestor
    --------------------+----------------------+----------------------+--------------------
    2022-01-10 08:11:20 | 8667764846443717831  |  <null>              |  true
    2022-01-10 08:11:34 | 7860805980949777961  | 8667764846443717831  |  true

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: History columns
  :widths: 20, 30, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``made_current_at``
    - ``timestamp(3) with time zone``

>     - The instant when the snapshot became active

Reviewer 2: The time?

  * - ``snapshot_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier for the snapshot
  * - ``parent-_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier for the parent snapshot
  * - ``is_current_ancestor``
    - ``boolean``
    - Whether or not this snapshot is an ancestor of the current snapshot

``$snapshots`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``$snapshots`` table provides a detailed overview of the snapshots performed in the log of the Iceberg table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``$snapshots`` table provides a detailed view of snapshots of the Iceberg table.
```

> Use the following query::

Reviewer 3: see above

    2022-01-10 08:11:20 | 8667764846443717831  |  <null>              |  append            |   hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/test_table/metadata/snap-8667764846443717831-1-100cf97e-6d56-446e-8961-afdaded63bc4.avro | {changed-partition-count=0, total-equality-deletes=0, total-position-deletes=0, total-delete-files=0, total-files-size=0, total-records=0, total-data-files=0}
    2022-01-10 08:11:34 | 7860805980949777961  | 8667764846443717831  |  append            |   hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/test_table/metadata/snap-7860805980949777961-1-faa19903-1455-4bb8-855a-61a1bbafbaa7.avro | {changed-partition-count=1, added-data-files=1, total-equality-deletes=0, added-records=1, total-position-deletes=0, added-files-size=442, total-delete-files=0, total-files-size=442, total-records=1, total-data-files=1}

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: Snapshots columns
  :widths: 20, 30, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``commited_at``
    - ``timestamp(3) with time zone``

>     - The instant when the snapshot became active

Reviewer 2: instant->time?

  * - ``snapshot_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier for the snapshot
  * - ``parent_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier for the parent snapshot
  * - ``operation``
    - ``varchar``
    - The type of operation performed on the Iceberg table. Supported operation types are:: ``append`` TODO
  * - ``manifest_list``
    - ``varchar``
    - The list of avro manifest files containing the detailed information about the snapshot changes.
  * - ``summary``
    - ``map(varchar, varchar)``
    - A summary of the changes made from the previous snapshot to the current snapshot

``$manifests`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``$manifests`` table provides a detailed overview of the manifests corresponding to the snapshots performed in the log of the Iceberg table.

Reviewer 3: wrap

.. code-block:: text

     partition             | record_count  | file_count    | total_size    |  data
    -----------------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+--------------------------------------
    {c1=1, c2=2021-01-12}  |  2            | 2             |  884          | {c3={min=1.0, max=2.0, null_count=0}}
    {c1=1, c2=2021-01-13}  |  1            | 1             |  442          | {c3={min=1.0, max=1.0, null_count=0}}

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: Partitions columns
  :widths: 30, 20, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``partition``
    - ``row(...)``
    - A row which contains the mapping of the partition column name(s) to the partition column value(s)
  * - ``record_count``
    - ``bigint``
    - The number of records under the partition
  * - ``file_count``
    - ``bigint``
    - The number of files mapped under the partition
  * - ``total_size``
    - ``bigint``
    - The size of all the files under the partition
  * - ``data``
    - ``row(... row (min ..., max ... , null_count bigint))``
    - Partition range metadata

``$files`` table

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 3: underline too long

  :widths: 20, 30, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``content``
    - ``integer``
    - TODO
  * - ``file_path``
    - ``varchar``
    - The data file location
  * - ``file_format``
    - ``varchar``
    - The format of the data file
  * - ``record_count``
    - ``bigint``
    - The number of entries contained in the data file
  * - ``file_size_in_bytes``
    - ``bigint``
    - The data file size
  * - ``column_sizes``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``
    - The size for each column in the columnar file
  * - ``value_counts``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``
    - The count of entries per column in columnar file
  * - ``null_value_counts``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``
    - The number of ``NULL`` values per column in the columnar file
  * - ``nan_value_counts``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``
    - The number of non numerical values per column in the columnar file
  * - ``lower_bounds``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``
    - The lower bounds per column in the columnar file
  * - ``upper_bounds``
    - ``map(integer, bigint)``
    - The upper bounds per column in the columnar file
  * - ``key_metadata``
    - ``varbinary``

>     - TODO

Reviewer 2: You may find inspiration in https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/master/api/src/main/java/org/apache/iceberg/ContentFile.java

Author: Thank you very much.

     hdfs://hadoop-master:9000/user/hive/warehouse/test_table/metadata/faa19903-1455-4bb8-855a-61a1bbafbaa7-m0.avro |  6277           |   0                  | 7860805980949777961   |  1                       |   0                         |  0                          |{{contains_null=false, lower_bound=1, upper_bound=1},{contains_null=false, lower_bound=2021-01-12, upper_bound=2021-01-12}}

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: Manifests columns
  :widths: 30, 30, 40
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``path``
    - ``varchar``
    - The manifest file location
  * - ``length``
    - ``bigint``
    - The manifest file length
  * - ``partition_spec_id``
    - ``integer``
    - The identifier for the partition specification used to write the manifest file
  * - ``added_snapshot_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier of the snapshot during which this manifest entry has been added

>   * - ``added_data_files_count``

Author: follow-up PR for exposing further fields in the $manifests table: https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/10809

        partitioning = ARRAY['c1', 'c2'],
        location = '/var/my_tables/test_table')

.. _iceberg-metadata-tables:

Metadata tables
---------------

> The connector exposes for each Iceberg table several metadata tables

Reviewer 3: The connector exposes several metadata tables for each Iceberg table. These metadata table contain information about the internal structure of the Iceberg table.

that can be used to inspect its internal structure.
You can query each metadata table by appending the
metadata table name to the table name::

   SELECT * FROM "test_table$data"

``$data`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``$data`` table is an alias for the Iceberg table.

Reviewer 3: for the Iceberg table itself.

The statement::

    SELECT * FROM "test_table$data"

is equivalent to::

    SELECT * FROM test_table

``$properties`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``$properties`` table provides access to general information about iceberg

Reviewer 3: Iceberg

table configuration and any additional metadata key/value pairs that the table

> was tagged with.

Reviewer 3: is tagged with

You can retrieve the properties of the current snapshot of the Iceberg

> table ``test_table`` by using the query::

Reviewer 3: the following query::

    SELECT * FROM "test_table$properties"

.. code-block:: text

     key                   | value    |
    -----------------------+----------+
    write.format.default   | PARQUET  |
    format-version         | 2        |

``$history`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``$history`` table provides a log of the metadata changes performed on
the Iceberg table.

You can retrieve the changelog of the Iceberg table ``test_table``

> by using the query::

Reviewer 3: the following query

    SELECT * FROM "test_table$history"

.. code-block:: text

     made_current_at                  | snapshot_id          | parent_id            | is_current_ancestor
    ----------------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+--------------------
    2022-01-10 08:11:20 Europe/Vienna | 8667764846443717831  |  <null>              |  true
    2022-01-10 08:11:34 Europe/Vienna | 7860805980949777961  | 8667764846443717831  |  true

The output of the query has the following columns:

.. list-table:: History columns
  :widths: 30, 30, 40
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``made_current_at``
    - ``timestamp(3) with time zone``
    - The time when the snapshot became active
  * - ``snapshot_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier of the snapshot
  * - ``parent_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier of the parent snapshot
  * - ``is_current_ancestor``
    - ``boolean``
    - Whether or not this snapshot is an ancestor of the current snapshot

``$snapshots`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``$snapshots`` table provides a detailed view of snapshots of the

> Iceberg table. A snapshot consist of one or more file manifests, and the complete table contents

Reviewer 3: consists of

Reviewer 3: the compete table content

  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Type
    - Description
  * - ``path``
    - ``varchar``
    - The manifest file location
  * - ``length``
    - ``bigint``
    - The manifest file length
  * - ``partition_spec_id``
    - ``integer``
    - The identifier for the partition specification used to write the manifest file
  * - ``added_snapshot_id``
    - ``bigint``
    - The identifier of the snapshot during which this manifest entry has been added
  * - ``added_data_files_count``
    - ``integer``
    - The number of data files with status ``ADDED`` in the manifest file
  * - ``existing_data_files_count``
    - ``integer``
    - The number of data files with status ``EXISTING`` in the manifest file
  * - ``deleted_data_files_count``
    - ``integer``
    - The number of data files with status ``DELETED`` in the manifest file
  * - ``partitions``
    - ``array(row(contains_null boolean, lower_bound varchar, upper_bound varchar))``
    - Partition range metadata

``$partitions`` table
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``$partitions`` table provides a detailed overview of the partitions
of the  Iceberg table.

You can retrieve the information about the partitions of the Iceberg table

> ``test_table`` by using the query::

Reviewer 3: the following query
